## Gramene Release 68
### Released: November 2023
## Summary

Release #68 features 22 new reference plant genomes (including 15 rice cultivars, the IWGSC RefSeq v2.1 version of the bread wheat assembly plus two new wheat cultivars, two oat genomes and the assembly for ash tree) for a total of 150 plant reference genomes. In addition, the poplar assembly was updated from version 3 to 4, and teff was replaced with a new asembly. This release features 152,102 gene family trees buit with 110 of those 150 plant genomes. Functional annotations were updated for Japonic rice genes. For genes in trees, the closest annotated homolog (or model species homolog if the former was not found) is provided with percent identity in the search interface. For rice, maize, grapevine, and sorghum genes, a link for such gene in the corresponding pangenome site ([Gramene Oryza](https://oryza.gramene.org/), [Gramene Maize](https://maize-pangenome.gramene.org/), [Gramene Vitis](https://vitis.gramene.org/), and [SorghumBase](https://www.sorghumbase.org/), respectively), is also provided. RNA-seq-based gene expression levels for curated Arabidopsis, maize, sorghum, and glycine genes in different expression datasets is now available through eFP-Seq browsers. A new form for users to submit a gene's function was embeded in the "Add Papers" tab of the search interface, see for example [Os05g0421750](https://dev.gramene.org/main/v68/?filters={%22status%22:%22init%22,%22operation%22:%22AND%22,%22negate%22:false,%22marked%22:false,%22leftIdx%22:0,%22rightIdx%22:3,%22children%22:[{%22fq_field%22:%22id%22,%22fq_value%22:%22Os05g0421750%22,%22name%22:%22Os05g0421750%22,%22category%22:%22Genes%22,%22leftIdx%22:1,%22rightIdx%22:2,%22negate%22:false,%22showMenu%22:false,%22marked%22:true}],%22showMarked%22:true,%22showMenu%22:false,%22moveCopyMode%22:%22%22,%22searchOffset%22:0,%22rows%22:20}&genomes=) - _Click on the "Add Papers" tab_.

## Release Information
- [New data & features](#new-this-release)
- [Databases](#databases)
- [References](#references)

## New data & features {#new-this-release}

### Genomes
#### New genomes (22):
In this release, we are adding 15 new rice cultivars:

- ARC GCA_009831255.1
- Azucena GCA_009830595.1
- Chao Meo GCA_009831315.1
- Gobol Sail (Balam) GCA_009831025.1
- IR64 GCA_009914875.1
- Ketan Nangka GCA_009831275.1
- Khao Yai Guang GCA_009831295.1
- Larha Mugad GCA_009831355.1
- Lima GCA_009831355.1
- Liu Xu GCA_009829375.1
- MH63 GCA_001618785.1
- N22 GCA_001952365.2
- Natel Boro GCA_009831335.1
- PR106 GCA_009831045.1
- ZS97 GCA_001618795.1

Three new wheat assemblies:

- _Triticum aestivum_ IWGSC RefSeq v2.1 GCA_018294505.1	- Prior assembly (non-sequential) still available: IWGSC - GCA_900519105.1
- _T. aestivum_ cv. Renan GCA_937894285.1
- _T. aestivum_ cv. Kariega GCA_910594105.1	

and the following plant genomes:

- _Avena sativa_ cv. Sang (Oat) GCA_910574605.1		
- _A. sativa_ cv. Ot3098 (Oat) GCA_022788535.1	
- _Fraxinus excelsior_ (ash tree) GCA_900149125.1	
- _Cajanus cajan_ (pigeon pea)	GCA_000340665.1	

#### Updated genomes (2):

- _Eragrostis tef_ (teff) GCA_024500355.1 - Prior assembly (non-sequential) replaced: GCA_000970635.1
- _Populus trichocarpa_ (black cottonwood) GCA_000002775.4 - Prior assembly (sequential) replaced: GCA_000002775.3

  
#### Updated gene annotation:

- _Oryza sativa_ (rice) GCA_001433935.1 

### New features:

- eFP browsers for Arabidopsis, maize, sorghum, and glycine
- Submit a gene's function form, see [example](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSey-xPyTysdd9c2phXT6kcbjEDeCppG4dLG7LjZCeLpx_KGog/viewform) for the [Os05g0421750](https://dev.gramene.org/main/v68/?filters={%22status%22:%22init%22,%22operation%22:%22AND%22,%22negate%22:false,%22marked%22:false,%22leftIdx%22:0,%22rightIdx%22:3,%22children%22:[{%22fq_field%22:%22id%22,%22fq_value%22:%22Os05g0421750%22,%22name%22:%22Os05g0421750%22,%22category%22:%22Genes%22,%22leftIdx%22:1,%22rightIdx%22:2,%22negate%22:false,%22showMenu%22:false,%22marked%22:true}],%22showMarked%22:true,%22showMenu%22:false,%22moveCopyMode%22:%22%22,%22searchOffset%22:0,%22rows%22:20}&genomes=) - _Click on the "Add Papers" tab_.


## Databases {#databases}
### Comparative Genomics

[**Gene Trees**](https://ensembl.gramene.org/info/genome/compara/prot_tree_stats.html)
A total of 156,836 protein-coding gene family trees were constructed using the peptide encoded by
the canonical transcript (i.e., a representative transcript for a given gene) for each
of 3,867,457 individual genes (5,390,863 input proteins) from 110 plant genomes.

[**Whole-Genome Alignments**](https://ensembl.gramene.org/info/genome/compara/compara_analyses.html)
There are 279 pairwise genomic alignments. The majority of species in Gramene were aligned with _Oryza sativa_ Japonica (reference monocot), and _Arabidopsis thaliana_ and _Vitis vinifera_ (reference dicots).

[**Synteny**](https://ensembl.gramene.org/info/genome/compara/compara_analyses.html)
80 paired synteny maps are available. 

[**Putative Split Genes**](http://ftp.gramene.org/CURRENT_RELEASE/splitgenes/)
Updated split genes for the current release are available on the FTP site. These are putative gene annotation artifacts (also known as contiguous gene split models) and are based on the latest Ensembl Compara Gene Tree database. Overall statistics for each species is given in the [README](https://ftp.gramene.org/CURRENT_RELEASE/split_genes/1_ReadMe_SplitGenesBySpecies.txt).

[**Plant Reactome**](https://plantreactome.gramene.org)
No updates in this release.

Plant Reactome is the pathway knowledgebase of Gramene. We utilize the Reactome pathway data model to represent plant metabolic, transport and signaling pathways, developmental processes, organ differentiation, and transcriptional regulatory networks. Manual biocuration is conducted in the reference species rice (_O. sativa_) and pathways are then projected via gene orthology to other species including single-cell photoautotrophs, lower plants, and higher plants. This release is a maintenance release. Plant Reactome continues to host pathway projections for 130 plant species (99 of which are in Gramene). Additional details and statistics can be found in the Plant Reactome's site [release notes](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=111&Itemid=360&lang=en).

### Protein Annotation, GO, Xref Protein domain information 

No updates in this release.

### Variation

No updates in this release. Genetic variation data continues to be available for 17 plant species, including _Arabidopsis thaliana_, maize,  rice (Japonica, Indica, _O. glaberrima_, and _O. glumaepatula_), brachypodium, sunflower, barley, apple, tomato, sorghum, bread and durum wheat, black bean, lettuce, and cocoa. Variation for the last three species is not yet available via BioMart.

### Expression

No updates in this release. Gramene continues to display Expression Atlas data with a total of 1007 plant experiments. Baseline gene expression data for 23 plant genomes has been curated and processed with the [EMBL-EBI's Expression Atlas](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/plant/experiments), and is available via Gramene's Search, Gramene's Genome Browser, and Gramene's pathways interface, the Plant Reactome. Differential expression for most of those species is available directly in the Expression Atlas website. 

### Pathways

No updates in this release. The release continues to host 339 manually curated Japonica rice pathways, and orthology-based pathways for 99 plant species cross-linked with [Gramene’s Plant Reactome](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/) entries.

### Gramene Mart

No updates in this release.

## Infrastructure

**Web Services:** Gramene's [web services page](https://gramene.org/web-services) documents ways to directly connect to and analyze our databases.

- Public MySQL Server: 

Our partner Ensembl Genomes offers a public, read-only MySQL server with copies of the species-specific and comparative genomic databases that we use. To use this with the mysql command-line client:

  $ mysql -hmysql-eg-publicsql.ebi.ac.uk -P4157 -uanonymous

Please note that the versioning scheme used at this public database differs from ours; Gramene's release 68_110 is set as version 57_110 at Ensembl.


## References {#references}


## Funding

The Gramene project is currently funded by the United States Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service, USDA ARS grant #8062-21000-041-00D. 

