### Released: November 2021

Gramene's Oryza Pan-Genome (https://oryza.gramene.org) is a web portal for comparative plant genomics focused on rice varieties. In its third release, the Oryza pan-genome provides access to 15 new rice genomes: 9 indica, 2 aus, and 4 japonica varieties including Carolina Gold rice (Zhou _et al_, 2020; Wang _et al_, 2018; Stein _et al_, 2018), and one updated reference genome: _Oryza sativa indica_ (var. 93-11). These 16 new or updated Oryza genomes were added to the collection of 9 Oryza genomes also available in Gramene to a total of 25 Oryza genomes.

Fifteen new rice reference genomes including Carolina Gold, and one updated (indica reference) genome, added up to a total of 25 Oryza genomes plus _Leersia perrieri_, the closest relative of the Oryzae.

Together with 6 plant outgroup species (_Arabidopsis thaliana_, sorghum, grapevine, Chlamydomonas, Selaginella, and 2 assembly versions of maize: v4 and v5), the 25 Oryza genomes and _L. perrieri_ (the most closely related species to the Oryza in the Oryzeae tribe), were used to build 37,315 protein-coding gene family trees. These family trees were constructed with 1,184,741 input proteins from 1,131,828 individual genes.

Baseline gene expression for the Japonica reference is available via the Oryza Pan-Genome search interface and linked to the Expression Atlas, while differential gene expression for the same species is only available on the Expression Atlas website.

For the 9 Oryza genomes in the prior release of the Pan-Genome (i.e., _O. sativa japonica_, _O. barthii_, _O. brachyantha_, _O. glaberrima_, _O. glumaepatula_, _O. meridionalis_, _O. nivara_, _O. punctata_, and _O. rufipogon_), as well as for L. perrieri and the other outgroups, orthology-based pathway projections are available via the Oryza Pan-Genome search interface. Similarly for those genomes, complementary pairwise DNA alignments (e.g., 81 for _O. sativa Japonica_) and/or synteny maps (e.g., 19 for _O. sativa Japonica_) are available on the Gramene website. Gramene continues to host genetic variation totalling over 40 million SNPs for the Japonica reference, _O. glaberrima_ and _O. glumaepatula_.

The genome databases were built in direct collaboration with the Gramene and Ensembl Plants projects. Gene expression and pathway associations were facilitated through collaboration with the Expression Atlas and Plant Reactome projects, respectively. Core funding for the project was provided by the National Science Foundation (NSF IOS-1127112) and the Agricultural Research Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA ARS 8062-21000-041-00D).  
