## Maize PanGenome Release 4.0
### Released: February 2024
## Summary
[Gramene's Maize PanGenome](http://maize-pangenome.gramene.org), a web portal for comparative plant genomics focused on Maize crop varieties,
has now released a new version featuring the genome sequence and gene annotation of the teosinte inbred line **Til11**, also featured in the [MaizeCODE project](http://www.maizecode.org/data/). The site now hosts a total of 43 genomes including three assembly versions of the B73 _Zea mays_ reference (RefGen_v3, RefGen_v4, and RefGen_v5), 25 [NAM maize founder genomes](https://nam-genomes.github.io/), 4 European flint genomes (DK105, EP1, F7 and PE0075), 4 additional maize genomes (Mo17, W22, PH207, and A188), and seven outgroups (_Arabidopsis thaliana_, _Oryza sativa_ Japonica, _Sorghum bicolor_, _Vitis vinifera_ ssp. vinifera PN40024, _Selaginella moellendorffii_, _Chlamydomonas reinhardtii_, and _Drosophila melanogaster_).

The maize gene models, together with the seven outgroups were used to build 35,360 protein-coding gene family trees. In addition, 143 pairwise synteny maps were build with version 5 of the _Z. mays_ B73 genome, Arabidopsis, rice, and sorghum. New to this release is data from the MaizeCODE project consisting of tissue-specific chIP-seq (H3K27ac, H3Kme3, H3K4me1) and gene expression (RNA-seq, RAMPAGE and shRNA-seq) data for five tissues (immature ears, endosperm, root tips, coleoptilar tips and pollen) of four MaizeCODE genomes (Til11, B73, NC350 and W22); as well as transcription factor chIP-seq data (GT1, HDZIV6, TU1A) for immature B73 corn ears. RNAseq gene expression data from the NAM project is also available for the 26 NAM maize genomes; and data from 32 baseline gene expression studies from the EBI Expression Atlas, and 270 orthology-based pathway projections from the Plant Reactome is provided for the B73 (v5) reference.

The expression tab of search results now shows eFP browser with gene expression data from 12 studies, and a new sequence tab for quick access to gene, transcript and protein sequences for a gene model. 

The outgroup genome databases were built in direct collaboration with the [Ensembl Plants](http://plants.ensembl.org) project. Other data sets were facilitated via collaborations with the [Expression Atlas](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/plant/experiments), the [Plant Reactome](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/), and the [Bio-Analytic Resource for Plant Biology or BAR](https://bar.utoronto.ca/)  databases.

## Release Information
- [Overall Highlights](#overall-highlights)
- [Comparative Genomics](#comparative-genomics)
- [Variation](#variation)
- [Gene Expression](#gene-expression)
- [Pathways](#pathways)
- [Publications](#publications)
- [Funding](#funding)

## Overall Highlights
**New genomes**
- One new maize reference genome: [Til11](https://maize-pangenome-ensembl.gramene.org/Zea_maysti11/Info/Annotation/#assembly)

**New data**
- 35,360 protein-coding gene family trees from 1,674,759 protein sequences
- 143 pairwise synteny maps comparing all maize genomes with _Z. mays_ B73 v5, Arabidopsis, rice, and sorghum
- MaizeCODE data: RNA (RNA-seq, RAMPAGE and shRNA-seq) and chIP-seq (H3K27ac, H3Kme3, H3K4me1) for four genomes: Til11, B73, NC350 and W22 in tissues including immature ears, endosperm, root tips, coleoptilar tips and pollen; TF chIP-seq data (GT1, HDZIV6, TU1A) for B73 in immature ears
- NAM data: RNAseq tracks across the 26 NAM maize genomes
- Additional gene expression and orthology-based pathway projections for the reference genome *Zea mays* B73 v5

**New features**
- Expression tab now shows eFP browser with 12 studies
- Sequences tab in gene search results provides quick access to gene, transcript and protein sequences for a gene model
- Papers tab lists publications describing gene function and has now a user entry form to suggest gene function given experimental evidence. Search for [357 curated maize genes](https://maize-pangenome.gramene.org/?filters={%22status%22:%22init%22,%22operation%22:%22AND%22,%22negate%22:false,%22marked%22:false,%22leftIdx%22:0,%22rightIdx%22:3,%22children%22:[{%22fq_field%22:%22capabilities%22,%22fq_value%22:%22pubs%22,%22name%22:%22publication%22,%22category%22:%22Curated%22,%22leftIdx%22:1,%22rightIdx%22:2,%22negate%22:false,%22showMenu%22:false,%22marked%22:true}],%22showMarked%22:false,%22showMenu%22:false,%22moveCopyMode%22:%22%22,%22searchOffset%22:0,%22rows%22:20}&genomes=4577)

## Comparative Genomics

[**Gene Trees.**](http://maize-pangenome-ensembl.gramene.org/prot_tree_stats.html) A total of
35,360 protein-coding gene family trees were constructed using the peptide encoded by
the canonical transcript (i.e., a representative transcript for a given gene) for each
of 1,628,071 individual genes (1,674,759 input proteins) from 42 plant genomes.

[**Synteny**](https://maize-pangenome-ensembl.gramene.org/compara_analyses.html). 143 pairwise synteny maps between all maize genomes, and _Z. mays_ B73 v5, Arabdopsis, rice or sorghum.

[**Whole-Genome Alignments**](https://maize-pangenome-ensembl.gramene.org/info/genome/compara/compara_analyses.html). Pairwise genomic alignments for B73 v5 with sorghum, Japonica rice, wheat, and Brachypodium are available in the Gramene site and will be made available here across the maize genomes in future releases.

## Variation

The following variation datasets are mapped to the _Z. mays_ B73 v5 reference assembly:

**HapMap2 dataset**

A variation set which comprises the maize HapMap2 data. This dataset incorporates approximately 55 million SNPs and InDels identified in a collection of 103 pre-domesticated and domesticated Zea mays varieties, including a representative from the sister genus, Tripsacum dactyloides (Eastern gamagrass). Each line was sequenced to an average of 4.5-fold coverage using the Illumina GAIIx platform. The reads can be accessed from the SRA, with accession ID: SRA051245. Reads were initially mapped to the B73 RefGen_v3 reference genome using a combination of Bowtie, Novoalign and SOAP, then remapped to the most recent B73 RefGen_v4 and subsequently RefGen_v5 reference assemblies. The variations were scored by taking into account identity-by-descent blocks that are shared among the lines.

**The Panzea 2.7 genotyped-by-sequencing (GBS) dataset**

This variation data set consists of 719,472 SNPs (excluding 332 SNPs that were removed for mapping to scaffolds) typed in 16,718 maize and teosinte lines, and grouped in 14 overlapping populations according to the germplasm set in the corresponding metadata table.

*Structural Variation*

Structural variants are avaialable as data tracks for all 26 NAM genomes on the B73 v5 genome browser, see for example this region: Note: If you don't see the data, click on the configure button (spider gear icon) and select the genome(s) that you want to see 

## Gene Expression

Gene expression data for the Zea mays B73 genome reference was curated and
processed through the [EMBL-EBI Expression Atlas](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/plant/experiments).
The set consists of 32 studies with baseline expression and 57 with differential expression. Baseline experiments
are available through our Gene Search (Expression panel) and Genome Browser; [differential experiments](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments?kingdom=Plants&species=Zea+mays&experimentType=Differential) are available at the Expression Atlas.

Additional expression data is also available as data tracks on the corresponding maize genome browsers fron the NAM and MaizeENCODE projects, see for examples this region: 


## Pathways

In this fourth release, we also feature 270 in v5 (271 in v4) orthology-based maize pathways associated with 1,769 genes in v5 (1,817 in v4) in the [Plant Reactome](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/), the pathway knowledgebase. We utilize the Reactome pathway data model to represent plant metabolic, transport and signaling pathways, developmental processes, organ differentiation, and transcriptional regulatory networks. Manual biocuration is conducted in the reference _Oryza sativa_ Japonica species, and pathways are then projected via gene orthology to the B73 _Zea mays_ (pior reference), and other crops and model plants, lower plants and single-cell photoautotrophs.

## Publications

Haberer, G., Kamal, N., Bauer, E., Gundlach, H., Fischer, I., Seidel, M. A., Spannagl, M., Marcon, C., Ruban, A., Urbany, C., Nemri, A., Hochholdinger, F., Ouzunova, M., Houben, A., Schön, C.-C., & Mayer, K. F. X. (2020). European maize genomes highlight intraspecies variation in repeat and gene content. _Nature Genetics_, 52(9), 950–957. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-0671-9

Hirsch, C. N., Hirsch, C. D., Brohammer, A. B., Bowman, M. J., Soifer, I., Barad, O., Shem-Tov, D., Baruch, K., Lu, F., Hernandez, A. G., Fields, C. J., Wright, C. L., Koehler, K., Springer, N. M., Buckler, E., Buell, C. R., de Leon, N., Kaeppler, S. M., Childs, K. L., & Mikel, M. A. (2016). Draft Assembly of Elite Inbred Line PH207 Provides Insights into Genomic and Transcriptome Diversity in Maize. _The Plant Cell_, 28(11), 2700–2714. https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.16.00353

Lin, G., He, C., Zheng, J., Koo, D.-H., Le, H., Zheng, H., Tamang, T. M., Lin, J., Liu, Y., Zhao, M., Hao, Y., McFraland, F., Wang, B., Qin, Y., Tang, H., McCarty, D. R., Wei, H., Cho, M.-J., Park, S., … Liu, S. (2021). Chromosome-level genome assembly of a regenerable maize inbred line A188. _Genome Biology_, 22(1), 175. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-021-02396-x

Springer, N. M., Anderson, S. N., Andorf, C. M., Ahern, K. R., Bai, F., Barad, O., Barbazuk, W. B., Bass, H. W., Baruch, K., Ben-Zvi, G., Buckler, E. S., Bukowski, R., Campbell, M. S., Cannon, E. K. S., Chomet, P., Dawe, R. K., Davenport, R., Dooner, H. K., Du, L. H., … Brutnell, T. P. (2018). The maize W22 genome provides a foundation for functional genomics and transposon biology. _Nature Genetics_, 50(9), 1282–1288. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-018-0158-0

Yang, N., Xu, X.-W., Wang, R.-R., Peng, W.-L., Cai, L., Song, J.-M., Li, W., Luo, X., Niu, L., Wang, Y., Jin, M., Chen, L., Luo, J., Deng, M., Wang, L., Pan, Q., Liu, F., Jackson, D., Yang, X., … Yan, J. (2017). Contributions of Zea mays subspecies mexicana haplotypes to modern maize. _Nature Communications_, 8(1), 1874. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02063-5


## Funding

Core funding for the project is provided by the Agricultural Research Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA ARS 8062-21000-041-00D). The MaizeCODE project was funded via a National Science Foundation award #1445025.
