## Maize PanGenome Release 3.0
### Released: March 2023
## Summary
[maize-pangenome.gramene.org](http://maize-pangenome.gramene.org), a web portal for comparative plant genomics focused on Maize crop varieties,
has now released a new version featuring eight new maize genomes that include four European flint maize genomes: DK105, EP1, F7 and PE0075 (Haberer et al, 2020), Mo17 (Yang et al, 2017), W22 (Springer et al, 2018), PH207 (Wang et al, 2023), A188 (Lin et al, 2021). The site now hosts a total of 43 genomes including three assembly versions of the B73 _Zea mays_ reference (RefGenv3, RefGen_v4, and RefGen_v5), 25 [NAM maize founder genomes](https://maizegdb.org/NAM_project), and seven outgroups (_Arabidopsis thaliana_, _Oryza sativa_ Japonica, _Sorghum bicolor_, _Vitis vinifera_ ssp. vinifera PN40024, _Selaginella moellendorffii_, _Chlamydomonas reinhardtii_, and _Drosophila melanogaster_).

The maize gene models, together with the seven outgroups were used to build 36,021 protein-coding gene family trees. Data from 25 baseline gene expression studies from the Expression Atlas, and 267 orthology-based pathway projections from the Plant Reactome are provided for B73 (v5).

The genome databases were built in direct collaboration with the [Gramene](http://gramene.org) and
[Ensembl Plants](http://plants.ensembl.org) projects. Other data sets were facilitated via
collaborations with the [Expression Atlas](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/plant/experiments),
and the [Plant Reactome](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/) databases.

## Release Information
- [Overall Highlights](#overall-highlights)
- [Comparative Genomics](#compara)
- [Gene Expression](#expression)
- [Pathways](#pathways)
- [Publications](#papers)
- [Funding](#funding)

## Overall Highlights {#overall-highlights}
- Eight new maize reference genomes: DK105, EP1, F7, PE0075, Mo17, W22, PH207, and A188
- 36,021 protein-coding gene family trees from 1,668,034 protein sequences
- Gene expression and orthology-based pathway projections for the reference 
  genome *Zea mays* B73 v4 and v5
- Genetic variation from Gramene/Ensembl Plants (HapMap2 and Panzea 2.7 GBS SNPs)
- Structural variation tracks for the NAM genomes
- Manually curated gene models track (not ready; might be FTP only)
- Gene curation user interface


## Comparative Genomics {#compara}

[**Gene Trees.**](http://maize-pangenome-ensembl.gramene.org/prot_tree_stats.html) A total of
36,021 protein-coding gene family trees were constructed using the peptide encoded by
the canonical transcript (i.e., a representative transcript for a given gene) for each
of 1,626,507 individual genes (1,668,034 input proteins) from 42 plant genomes.

## Expression {#expression}

Gene expression data for the Zea mays B73 genome reference was curated and
processed through the [EMBL-EBI Expression Atlas](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/plant/experiments).
The set consists of 25 studies with baseline expression and 55 with differential expression. Baseline experiments
are available through our Gene Search (Expression panel) and Genome Browser; [differential experiments](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/experiments?kingdom=Plants&species=Zea+mays&experimentType=Differential) are available
at the Expression Atlas.

## Pathways {#pathways}

In this third release, we also feature 267 in v5 (268 in v4) orthology-based maize pathways associated with 1518 genes in v5 (1540 in v4) in the [Plant Reactome](https://plantreactome.gramene.org/), the pathway knowledgebase. We utilize the Reactome pathway data model to represent plant metabolic, transport and signaling pathways, developmental processes, organ differentiation, and transcriptional regulatory networks. Manual
biocuration is conducted in the reference species rice (Oryza sativa Japonica) and pathways are then projected via gene
orthology to the B73 _Zea mays_ (pior reference), and other crops and model plants, lower plants and single-cell photoautotrophs.

## Publications {#papers}

Haberer, Georg, Nadia Kamal, Eva Bauer, Heidrun Gundlach, Iris Fischer, Michael A. Seidel, Manuel Spannagl, et al. 2020. “European Maize Genomes Highlight Intraspecies Variation in Repeat and Gene Content.” _Nature Genetics_ 52 (9): 950–57.

Lin, Guifang, Cheng He, Jun Zheng, Dal-Hoe Koo, Ha Le, Huakun Zheng, Tej Man Tamang, et al. 2021. “Chromosome-Level Genome Assembly of a Regenerable Maize Inbred Line A188.” _Genome Biology_ 22 (1): 175.

Springer, Nathan M., Sarah N. Anderson, Carson M. Andorf, Kevin R. Ahern, Fang Bai, Omer Barad, W. Brad Barbazuk, et al. 2018. “The Maize W22 Genome Provides a Foundation for Functional Genomics and Transposon Biology.” _Nature Genetics_ 50 (9): 1282–88.

Wang, Baobao, Mei Hou, Junpeng Shi, Lixia Ku, Wei Song, Chunhui Li, Qiang Ning, et al. 2023. “De Novo Genome Assembly and Analyses of 12 Founder Inbred Lines Provide Insights into Maize Heterosis.” _Nature Genetics_ 55 (2): 312–23.

Yang, Ning, Xi-Wen Xu, Rui-Ru Wang, Wen-Lei Peng, Lichun Cai, Jia-Ming Song, Wenqiang Li, et al. 2017. “Contributions of Zea Mays Subspecies Mexicana Haplotypes to Modern Maize.” _Nature Communications_ 8 (1): 1874.


## Funding {#funding}

Core funding for the project is provided by the Agricultural Research Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA ARS 8062-21000-041-00D).
